# Answer Set Programming (ASP) for Fleet Optimization

The goal of this project is to optimize airline fleet assignment and profit for a simple example case using answer set programming (ASP) / logic programming.


In a highly influential work by Hane et al. (1995), the "fleet assignment problem", which is about determining which _type of aircraft_ to assign to which flight, is presented alongside a possible solution. The problem is multifaceted as it is based on several variables, including profit, aircraft specifications and travel demand. Overall, it can be regarded as an optimization problem since it aims at determining the the most cost-effective and efficient way of assigning aircrafts.

Current research focuses on discovering new ways of solving this problem, i.e. through machine learning algorithms. Multiple attempts to solve variations of this problem have already been published, for example by Grönkvist (2005) who tackled the "tail assignment problem" of assigning _individual aircraft_ to flights. According to Barlow (2019), the airline scheduling problem still has not been solved completely (as of 4 years ago).

The used data was taken from Clarke (2012). Another example case was published by Belobaba (2014). Incidentally, the data tables of the latter example case are presented in basically the same exact structure, meaning that our guess and check program would also work for it - just the hard-coded registrations in the section "Count the number of flights on a route per aircraft" would have to be changed (and the data would have to be changed out, of course).

To use our code, no additional files need to be present apart from this notebook, as the .lp files can be generated by the code. Nevertheless, we included all of the generated files in the submission.

<b>Sources:</b>

Barlow, J. (2019, April 3). Exploring the airline industry’s great unsolved problem: airline scheduling. Amadeus. https://amadeus.com/en/insights/blog/amadeus-optym-airline-scheduling

Belobaba, P. (2014, March 12). Fleet Assignment. Network, Fleet and Schedule Strategic Planning. ITU Aviation Institute. http://aviation.itu.edu.tr/%5Cimg%5Caviation%5Cdatafiles/Lecture%20Notes/Network%20Fleet%20Schedule%20Strategic%20Planning/Lecture%20Notes/12%20-%20Fleet%20Assignment.pdf

Clarke, C. (2012, November 15). Fleet Assignment - Part 1. ProfessorCarlinClarke.com. https://www.professorcarlinclarke.com/avsc-3060-airline-management/fleet-assignment-part-1

Grönkvist, M. (2005). The Tail Assignment Problem. 51st Airline Group of the International Federation of Operational Research Societies Annual Proceedings - Annual Symposium and Study Group Meeting, AGIFORS 2011; Antalya; Turkey; 10 October 2011 Through 14 October 2011, 3, 1509–1804.

Hane, C.A., Barnhart, C., Johnson, E.L. et al. The fleet assignment problem: Solving a large-scale integer program. Mathematical Programming 70, 211–232 (1995). https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01585938
